# Compuer Science Principles Digital Information

Operating System(OS): The Software that communicates directly with the hardware. This includes the processors, memory, or attached devices. 

Application Programming Interface(API): How information is stored on a device using various file formatting systems so programmers can access the hardware on a machine for use in thieir own applications

Software Development Kits(SDKs): A 3-Piece Set of tools that help programmers build applications that can be installed on top of the Operating System.
    1. Code: Prebuilt sets of code that defines things like numbers, arithmetic, file systems, User Inerface(such as buttons or windows),Navigation(keyboard, mouse, touch)
    2. Programming Language: The language programmers tell the computer to do when the user wants to run an application, and communicate to teh operating system
    3. Interpreter or Compiler
        Interpreter: Interpretes the programming language you understand as a porgrammer live as a language the computer understands.
        Compiler: Doesn't interpret live, but takes all that was programmed and converts it all to the native language understood by the operating system and hardware. Code runs more efficiently,however the limitation is, if you want to change it, you'll need to reprogram and recompile it!
---

# Computer Communications
Binary: a system with only two possible states (Y/N) (ON/OFF) (1/0)
Boolean: a value that contains one of two options. True or False.
Bit: a single binary state
Nibble: a group of four binary digits; half a bye(4 bits)
Byte: a grouping of eight binary digits
    kilobyte: 1024 bytes
    megabyte: 1024 kilobytes
    gigabyte: 1024 megabytes
    terabyte: 1024 gigabytes
Encoding: Process of taking information like a string or text and converting it to a binary number
Decoding:  process of coding in reverse. Taking a binary number and converting back into information like a string or text.
Bitsize: The established size of teh message made of bits. 3 ways of transmitting digital information: 
    1.Radio
    2.Electrical
    3.Optical
Bitrate: The number of bits transmitted each second
Bandwidth: represented as a specific bit rate, theoretical maximum that a communication system can support.
Latency: The time it takes to get a message from one place on the globe to another.

# Number Systems
Binary number system: based on 2. Serves as teh foundational way computers store, communicate and process information.
    such as 2^0. 2^1, 2^2, 2^3
Decimal number system: based on 10
    such as 10^0, 10^1, 10^2, 10^3
Octal number system: based on 8
    such as 8^0, 8^1, 8^2, 8^3
Hexadecimal number system: based on 16. Common in web design represented by three(RGB) or six hexadecimal numbers(RRGGBB)
    such as 16^0, 16^1, 16^2, 16^3

(Scientific Notation)
Base number: Describes the maximum number of possible digits, followed by columns that are incremented exponentially the further you go to the left to make larger values, works in reverse to make smaller numbers as well.

Binary States: The basis of how computers store, process, and share information using states of on or off
    Encoding
    take the right column(2^0)(equals 1) and multiply by the digit(1)
    1 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 1
    1           | 0            | 0            | 1            | 1
    2^4x1(16)   2^3x0(0)       2^2x0(0)       2^1x2(2)       2^0x1(1)
    16+0+0+2+1
    19

    Decoding
    can do the opposite to get binary using a whole number and taking the largest binary column number thats less than or equal to the number and subtracting from it until you reach 0.
    23(whole number)
    23-16-4-2-1=0
    16| 8 | 4 | 2 | 1 (binary)
    1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 1

Overflow: a situation where you run out of room to store value 
    such as when you have 1|1|1|1|1|1 and get one more value and have to add an extra column leading to an error since the addional value added from the extra column is "thrown away"

# Encoding and Sending Text
Protocol: Where both ends of communication has the same encoding and decoding process, or else they will not be able to communicate
American Standard Code for Information Interchange(ASCII): a single byte encoding system where a set of unique characters with a corresponding number in binary. (256 characters are stored in a single byte, or 8 bits)
Unicode: uses multiple bytes to represent thousands and thousands of symbols from languages all around the world. The web is standardized on the UTF8 Format, or 8-bit Unicode transformation format. (backward compatible with ASCII)
plain zero of Unicode: Four hexadecimal numbers require two bytes to store them or sixteen bits, so using just two bytes over 65,000 symbols can be encoded and decoded    
    U+0044 = D (four hexadecimal numbers require 2 bytes/16bits to store them) (theres 16 plains of unicode but only the first 3 are used)
    
Hypertext markup language(HTML) is called a markup language because you are denoting specific areas. It gives documents structure so the application that reads it can understand what different parts of teh documents are and how they are related to each other.

# Working With Large Amounts of Data
1 kilobyte (KB) = 1024 bytes
1 megabyte(MB) = 1024 kilobytes
1 gigabyte(GB) = 1024 megabytes
1 terabyte(TB) = 1024 gigabytes
1 petabyte(PB) = 1024 terabytes = 1,125,899,906,842,624
1 exabyte = 1024 petabyte
1 zetabyte = 1024 exabyte
1 yottabyte = 1024 zetabyte

Bandwidth: How much information can be transferred in a particular time

Text Compression
Algorithm of the compression: We can look for common combinations of characters and swap them out with a unique character, and since there arethousands of unicode characters available we can swap them with any of these. Looking for common phrases or combinations of characters then replace them with other unicode characters and can do this over multiple passes to further reduce the number of characters with more and more representations of common patterns by building a dictionary of common words and defining the replacements. 

RGB: the stored value in a pixel created by telling a pixel how bright to make each unique color inside.(RRGGBB or RGB)
HD resolution of 1920x1080 is 2,073,600 pixels of data to store
4k resolution is 4x the size of HD

TIF format can store image data and can be encoded and decoded using that image format.
Bitmap: storing pictures using individual pixels. Increasing the image can result in the image getting distorted or pixelated
    a web browser can work with bitmap formats like JPEG, PNG, or GIF
Vectors: stores pictures using points of the boxes which are then encoded based on a coordinate system leading to a much smaller file. Even with making the image bigger, it can scale easily and redraw the lines proportionally based on how you've resized the image. The limitation is the more advance the vector is, the more data it requires. 
    a web browser can work with vector formats like SVG

Image Compression
GIF is based on a total number of 256 colors. Whether it is a standard 256 color palette or a 24-bit RGB color space.
First option is to use the Standard GIF Palette of colors, and define the closest color for each pixel in the original file and save it using that color. The result is an image that has the detail of the original but has far fewer variations in color.
Second option is to find the 256 most used colors in the image and to build the palette using those, and then converting each pixel to the closest color leading to a much more accurate but still lower color variation.

With the colors converted, the file is then compressed using a lossless format called LZW. Lossless compression means that it can reduce the file size further without degrading the visual quality of it so when it is decompressed can return to its original format.

JPEG unlike GIF has a variable amount of compression you can apply to it that lets you trade off size for details. JPEG Compression is Lossy, meaning as it compresses in file size, can not be uncompressed into the original format. Resulting in lost details when it is opened and displayed again. JPEG allows you to define the amoount of loss in detail when the image is compressed. Ranging from little to no loss in detail or significant amounts.

Portable Network Graphics(PNG) is an improved version of the GIF format where pixels can contain 24-bit RGB color values or 32-bit values that also include transparency allowing images or content that appears behind it to show through the image.

There are other formats that are used for print, photography and more. In the printing process, unlike with light, pigment uses different colors to build the rainbow of colors that can be created. with CMYK(cyan, magenta, yellow, and black as the primary colors.)

In Photography, camera sensors capture light information that isnt processed into specific colors. As a result these formats sometimes called RAW formats, contain data not pixels and need to be processed using software to create the color for each pixel. The RAW file stores the radiometric characteristics of the picture. These could include light intensity, color, and dynamic ranges within the subject captured by the image sensor.