# Internet Basics

ARPANET: Advanced Research Projects Agency Network Established in 1969 by the department of defense. 

Packets:  a blocks of information sent from one point of the network to another. 

Standard Networking Procol: TCP/IP
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP): 
Internet Protocol (IP):

Tim Berners-Lee created an application called the World Wide Web, later renamed to Nexus at the European Organization for Nuclear Research, or Cern. He created the first web browser that allowed a user to navigate through pages of information using links to connect phrases to additional pages. 

Hypertext Transfer Protocol(HTTP)
Hypertext Markup Language(HTML)
httpd: very first web server

The High-Performance Computing Act was created and introduced by Senator Al Gore which lead to the funding of new technologies, including Mosaic, the first commercially successful web browser that capitalized on the commercialization 

Standards Bodies
Tim Berners-Lee created the World Wide Web Consortium, or W3C, which owns the rules for various languages like HTML, CSS, SVG, and more but is a slow organization. Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group(WHATWG): continues to develop HTML as a living standard.

the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers(ICANN): Nonprofit that organizes the various terms and phrases used to connect web addresses such as .com, .net, .ca, .uk, with the numeric protocols of the web

The Internet is maintained by a combination of government agencies, international groups, and companies in the private sector to keep the fundamental technologies of the internet working.

The internet is formed of multiple networks that all conform to the standard internet procols of the internet known as TCPIP.

International Air Transport Association(IATA) developed a system of three letter codes that every airport throughout the world has adopted.

ICANN does the same thing for the internet, using Uniform Resource Locations(URLs)

# Addressing and Routing Information
## Sending and receiving information
Packets say where they come from like a return address on an envelope and where its going to. If the packet is being sent to somewhere that doesn't exist or theres a problem, theres a way for the network to send a message back to the sender. The packet also needs to say how long it is by defining the number of bytes that are in the packet. finally need to know how many packets are in the overall message and in which place each individual packet lives within the set.

## The Internet Protocol and IP Address
The use of numbers as addresses is called the Internet Protocol or IP. Each device on the device has an IP address.
IPv4 is a sequence of 3 digit numbers seperated by a period such as 123.45.67.89. Each number can be a number from 0-255.
Each packet has the sender and receiver in the header. These are stored as IP adresses. 

There are private and public addresses and the IANA establishes what number sets are assigned to different groups. 
Private addresses can start with 192,172,or 10, while public addresses can start with 123, 24, or 89.

## Scaling up the internet from IPv4 to IPv6
IPv6 was created due to IPv4's four billion limit. 
IPv4 uses 32 bit, IPv6 uses 128 bits with a limit of 340 undecillion.

Dual Stack: Where IPv4 and IPv6 are supported at the same time allowing devices to work regardless if the hardware is updated or not

## The Domain Name Server and DNS

The Domain name is a sequence of phrases that map to a giant internet-wide database of IP addresses
Domain Name Server holds a lot of domain names and their matching IP addresses. There are many
DNS name resolution: The process of translating a domain name to an IP address
top-level domain: the last part of the domain such as .com, some use two letter country codes such as www.bbc.co.uk
host name: the middle part of teh domain before the .com such as google in google.com
webserver subname is before the host name such as www. or smtp. or ftp. such as www. in www.google.com