# Computer Science Principles: Programming

# Control Computers with Code
The course covers 4 of the big Ideas of the computer science principles curriculum.:
<!-- Creativity -->
-Abstraction
<!-- Data and Information -->
-Algorithms
-Programming
<!-- Digital Devices -->
-Global Impact
## History of programming
Ada Lovelace wrote an artical about Bernoulli numbers, a recursive equation based in number theory on the analytical engine. Since devices have gone from
Theoretical -> Physical
Manual -> Automatic
Analog -> Digital
With each evolutionary step, the way we programmed with computers had to evolve as well. Everything was done with a keyboard without a montitor so everything was done through printouts on paper
in some languages carriage return and print are carryovers from those printer days
## Forms of programming
Depending on what you want to do there are many forms of programming. Some forms give you direct access to the computer processor while others abstract the hardware into more human language

Machine Languages allow programmers to code directly to the processor or hardware. Processirs can be programmed by sending sequences and patterns of bits through the processor to enable actions to take place. as a result the code is almost natively written

Assembly Lanuage: An abstraction of Machine Languages uses codes to modify processor registers and perform functions.

Interpreted Languages are readable by humans more easily than assesmbly or machine languages. The programmer runs the code then runs it. A component called the interpreter reads each line of code and then interprets it into native instructions for the computers. The process is slower than machine language sine it has to interpret each line of code by the programmer: ex: Javascript

Compiled Language: Takes instructions written by a human and sends that code to something called a compiler. A compiler takes the program instructions and converts it to binary bytecode or native code for the hardware and creates a program called an executable. This program is native to the hardware and OS and cant easily be converted back to the original program instructions but with the code now in the native computer format it runs much faster than interpreted code. But if you need to make a change, you'll need to adjust the original program instructions and recompile it to create a new executable. If you're creating programs for multiple types of processors you need to compile unique versions for each native instruction code for the targeted platform. Ex: C is a compiled language


Object Oriented Programming(OOP): Treats everything as an object, an object can store values, perform actions called methods, and accept and return values. An object is defined using a template called a class which defines what an object can do. Then a programmer can create an instance of that class that will have all the capabilities by the class. Ex: Java and C# are object-oriented languages

Languages for data: There are languages that are specifically designed at working with data One example is SQL which is a language designed to work with databases. Its a query language meaning you ask the database a question and it gives you a dataset as a result.SQL can combine multiple databses together to create combinations that you can then analyze. R is another example of a data language, and is designed for statistical computing and graphing. 

Functional Programming: a much differnt way to approach programming. In a tradional programming language also known as imperative, you're defining a state of a value, object, or component. You create and define tasks called an algorithm that goes from beginning to end. Functional Programming isn't bound by an algorithm. In a functional language, you perform transformations onb values like a function in mathematics. You take a value or object and modify it with the ability to string multiple transformations together using functions. Examples of functional languages include: Haskell, Scala, and F#.

Scripting Languages: used to automate the process of Operating Systems regulary executing commands to configure servers, install software, or perform maintenance. They allow systems like Windows, Linux and MacOS to save common commands as a script than can be ran multiple times or distributed to multiple computers. Examples of Scripting Languages include: PowerShell, Perl, and Bash.

# Define Actions Using Code

## Work with values and variables
Computers store, process, and access data and information, ina  computer program, a programmer does this with variables.
A variable is a name that you use to refer to a value throughout your program, the computer then reserves the amount of space in memory to store that value and make it available to you as a programmer.
Integer is a whole number, There are two types of integers. signed(can represent positive or negative numbers) and unsigned(can only represent non-negative)
String is a list of characters or letters that are strung together to create a long sequence of letters, or a string.
You can assign a variable, a value to store inside of it and then change the value by performing math or other actions on it. You can refer to a value using its variable name and as a result you can take a variable and assign its value to another variable but the way this happens across languages and vary. Some languages copy the value from one variable to another, so now there are two unique values. Other languages tell a variable to point to a value that is stored in memory and if that value changes, it changes in two places. You can then take that value and output it some way such as to the screen. You can also send it to a component which is apart of a GUI, or render it on a screen by injecting it into the structure content within a webpage.

## Use functions to repeat actions
Functions are groups of actions that the programmer defines and gives a name. While variables are named values, functions are named actions.
After the code in the program starts running, the program jumps to that function, enters it, and runs the code inside. At the end it returns back to the code that called the function and continues on.
Program Flow: Theh steps that take place and the order they go in.
Functions are the generic name for name groupings of code.

## Break down tasks
If you look at water and drilling down to the molecules and then the atoms that form it, youll dive down to the smallest elements that form the basis on the object. Now take that principle and apply to an action. 
Take out the trash: steps in my head of what ill have to do, the steps ill need to do is
    (Generalized):
    Get the garbage bag
    Empty smaller Trash Cans
    Put in curbside can

    (less generalized):
    Get the garbage bag
    put a new trash bag into the bag
    empty smaller trash cans
    include recycling
    put in the curbside can
    put curbside can on street

    (more specific):
    Go to the kitchen, open the trash can and take the full trash bag out of the can
    Put a new trash bag into the trash can
    Go around the house and empty out the smaller trash cans into a trash bag and replaca the bags in the smaller trash cans
    go to the kitchen, and open the recycling bin and take the can of recycled materials out
    take the trash can and recycle can outside to the curbside trash can and recycling bin and put them into their corresponding bin
    if thursday, roll the curbside bins up to the end of the drive way
When you break down a process or a task, put yourself in someone else's shoes to see if the steps you outlined would make sense. If not, add the clarity and details you need to make it foolproof to get the desired results.

## Customize functions with parameters
Idea: Calculating an order total
Things to take into consideration: sales tax, shipping cost 
Variables: totalPrice
functions: calculates total cost, and inside we add a standard shipping fee and calculate the sales tax at 8%. (tax rates vary on location, some may have no sales tax, some cities add to the sales tax, and other variations-> we can do this by adding parameters) 
Paramter: when the function is called for the code we want to run, we provide a value to use within the function such as using a different tax rate when the function is ran. The function will then save it as a variable for the duration of the function. We then refer to that variable whenever we need it. At the end of the function, the parameter and variable that are stored in, are thrown away. We can also do this with the shipping rate, and adding another parameter.

## Variables and Scope
Scope: Defines how long a variable and the memory that is used to store it, is kept and how its available for the program.
If you create a variable then call a method or a function the variable is available to that method.  But if you enter a function or method and create variable there, as soon as the function or method is complete the variable is thrown away to include the name and value. The same thing will happen with variables in code if you write code that starts a function anything that is created in that function remains in that function. If a variable is scoped to the funciton, and a variable is created outside of the function enter into that function and change it itll change it for the entire program.If a variable is scoped outside of a function, it will be able to get applied to a larger portion of the program.

## Return values from functions
There are 3 ways to work with a value.
1st. Use a literal which is the value itself without any name or container. for example 5.
2nd. Use a variable.The variable has a value than can then be assigned to another variable.
3rd. Use a function or method. It will be used like a variable or literal, but to do that, it will need to return a value. like a variable will have a type, such as a return type. It will replace where the function was called with the value that is returned by it.

## Work with an API
When you create functions tha tperform certain actions, functions that require parameters,  functions that return values of certain types, and  you create functions that are a combination of these, With all of these mixed together you are creating an interface, or Applicaiton Programming Interface(API).

## Capture input from the user
Forms of user interaction:
Keyboard
Mouse
multitap gestures using your finger(s)
camera gestures tracking movement
voice input
other devices to detect motion, pressure, altitude, location, etc

Synchronous input: Where the program and input capturing happen in parallel
asynchronous input: Where the program must wait for input to continue

## Manage different variable types
Dynamically typed variables 
value doesnt match variable type, some variables will automatically convert it
Many languages have a method for you to identify the type of variable, literal, expression or function

## Create conditional tests
When you create code that dodes different things based on data is referred to as conditional.
(data type) Boolean Value: True or False
Equality operators such as ==, !=, > , >=, <, <=

if statement: Asks if something is true or false and runs a special section of code. You can also run an if else statement to see if something is true to run a section of code, or else run this other section of code.

## Build component conditional tests
True Or True > True
True Or False > True
False Or True > True
False or False > False

True and True > True
True and False > False
False and True > False
False and False > True

Not oerator will flip the value of the boolean, will assign the opposite of the current value to itself

## Use While Loops
Loops are a way for programmers to take a section of code and have the program run it multiple times. 
While Loop, you're asking a statement and it will run the code for as long as statement is true.
Avoid infinite loop

## Use for loops
Uses an iterator, This is a variable that is created only for the loop itself. You define it at the top of the loop, and it will only exist within the loop itself.
An if statement could be an example of if the iterator(i) starts at zero and loop under as long as the iterator is less than five to return true, and 0-4 will return true but once the iterator hits 5 will return false because 5 is not less than 5.

## Create arrays to store groups of values
Array is a collection of individual values such as IDs numbers for a bunch of people and can be referred to using a single name.
for example a carton of eggs, we'll start counting from the number zero because zero is the first unsigned integer digit. 

## Use loops with arrays
a loop will use the amount of items in the array as the max, and will loop for as many items there are in the array

## Changing Arrays
using the index number or the item you want to change, or the index number of where you may want to add a number.

# Objects and OOP
## Everything is an object
Everything is an object meaning that it can have different characteristics, perform certain actions, and have a name for you to help identify it. Such as a car with a different color, variety of doors, could be gas, diesal, electric, hybrid, could go forward, backwards, a VIN number, a license plate. Combining these components, youll have an object.

## Everything is a class
A class is a set of rules that define a category of objects or class of objects, look, behave, and take customization. In classes you define 4 things also known as class members:
    1. Class name
    2. Properties: The characteristics of the class. Defined using variables that can store numbers, strings, arrays, booleans, and other data types
    3. Methods: The actions of the class. Defined using functions, so they can accept and return a value.
    4. Constructor: What happens when you create or construct an object using the rules laid out by the class. Runs when you create an object using the rules of the class
A class is essentially a blueprint of the object such as with a house. While an instance of that blueprint, is the house itself.

## Work with existing classes and objects
As a programmer, you WILL work with pre built classes and SDKs. This might include a button component which is an object and is defined by a class
The constructor is helpful if you need to set thingsup in teh instance when it runs. When you work with an instance, youll access properties and methods inside it, defined by the class, using the instance name. This is done by taking the isntance name of the object and then access the property or method. To modify a property, youll use the property name and use the assignment operator to assign a value to the class instance property. To use a method you will use the method name just like any other function you would write and provide any parameters if required, usually wrapped by by a pair of parenthesis. 

Some methods and properties that are defined by a classand dont require an instance, they are called static properties and methods. With each instance created the constructor interates the counter number by one and is shared across all of the instances. 

## Make your own classes and objects
Using private classes and public classes to ensure the you made are being used the way they were intended to.
Private classes: Only available within the instance and they are hidden from anything outside of the class.
Public classes: Anyone can access the class such as variables, or methods like any function

## Extend Classes
Using the class you can improve it by adding more capabilities to it. Such as an animal class, you can create a fish class, bird class, or cat class that will bring everything that is part of the animal class to those new classes, like an extension.

## Use polymorphism using interfaces
If you create a variable that accepts integers we are typing that variable using the integer class. We can type variables to be any object we want, including objects based on classes that we created. If you take a variable and set it to the cat type, you can create an instance of a cat class and assign it to the variable. But you wouldnt be able to assign a fish to that variable. But theres a way to work around this, and thats by typing the variable to the super class, animal. Since the cat and fish class are both of the animal instance, if you type a variable to the class that the subclasses are an extension of, that class can be instantiated and assigned to that variable.

Interface: An interface is a tool in object oriented programming that allows you to categorize classes. 

If you have 5 classes, and 3 of them can fly. I can created an interface called flyable that says anything that implements the interface includes a fly method. Now with flyable interface so that the variable can accept any class based on a category that aligns with the rules that i defined in the interface. 

# Beyond Programming
## Debug Problems